<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE topic PUBLIC "-//OASIS//DTD DITA Topic//EN" "topic.dtd">
<topic id="basic_deeclopment_steps">
    <title>Basic development steps</title>
    <body>
        <section id="basic_development_steps_introduction">
            <title>Introduction</title>
            <p> This section will guide you through the basics of developing an image in the
                darkroom view. </p>
            <p> To begin, open an image in darkroom mode by double clicking an image thumbnail on
                the lighttable. The darkroom mode is where the actual adjustments for an image are
                made, where an arsenal of modules are at hand to help you reach your goal. </p>
            <p> Each change made on a module while developing an image is turned into a <xref
                    href="../darkroom/darkroom.dita#history"><i>history stack</i></xref><xref
                    href="../darkroom/darkroom.dita#history"/> item. The history is stored in a
                database and in an XMP sidecar file for the specific image. </p>
            <p> All changes are stored automatically when you switch images or go from one darktable
                view to another. You can safely leave darkroom mode or quit darktable at any time
                and come back later to continue your work. That said darktable does not need a
                    <q>save</q> button and it does not have one. <indexterm> save button
                </indexterm>
            </p>
            <p> On the left panel in darkroom mode is the <xref href="../darkroom/darkroom.dita#history"><i>history
                        stack</i></xref>, showing changes starting from bottom, and building up with
                each change made to the image. You can select a point in this history to show how
                the image looked at that point, for comparison of changes. The stack can be
                compressed: it will be optimized and redundant changes will be discarded. When you
                think you are done and are happy with what you have done, just compress the history
                stack. </p>
            <p> darktable ships with a number of modules, arranged into groups. These module groups
                are accessed via toggle buttons in the right panel, just under the histogram. There
                are also two special module groups named <q>active</q> and <q>favorites</q>, which
                only show modules enabled in the history for the current image, and modules selected
                as a favorite, respectively. Marking a module as a favorite is done in the <i>more
                    modules</i> dialog (<xref href="../darkroom/darkroom.dita#more_modules"/><xref
                    href="../darkroom/darkroom.dita#more_modules"/>), at the bottom of the right
                panel, by clicking a module until a star is displayed in front of the icon. </p>
        </section>
        <section id="basic_development_steps_wb">
            <title>White balance</title>
            <p> The <xref href="../darkroom/darkroom.dita#whitebalance"/> module controls the white
                balance or color temperature of the image. It's always enabled and reads its default
                values from camera metadata embedded in the image. The most common change is
                fine-tuning the white balance, which is done using the <q>temperature</q> slider.
                Moving this slider left will make the color balance cooler, and moving it right will
                make it warmer. </p>
        </section>
        <section id="basic_development_steps_exposure">
            <title>Exposure correction</title>
            <p> The <xref href="../darkroom/darkroom.dita#exposure"/> module is probably the most
                basic module of them all. Exposure is fine-tuned either by using the slider, or by
                dragging with the mouse in the <xref href="../darkroom/darkroom.dita#histogram"/>.
                You can also boost the black level to enhance contrast; but be careful: use small
                amounts, like steps of 0.005. There is also an auto-correct feature. </p>
        </section>
        <section id="basic_development_steps_noise">
            <title>Noise reduction</title>
            <p> The best starting point for noise reduction is <xref
                    href="../darkroom/darkroom.dita#denoise_profiled"/>. This module offers an
                almost <q>single-click</q> solution to fight noise. From a user perspective the
                effect only depends on camera type and ISO value, both derived from Exif data. All
                other settings are taken from a database of noise profiles that the darktable team
                has collected, now covering well above 200 popular camera models. In addition you
                have several other options in darktable to reduce noise. There is <xref
                    href="../darkroom/darkroom.dita#raw_denoise"/>, <xref
                    href="../darkroom/darkroom.dita#denoise_bilateral"/>, <xref
                    href="../darkroom/darkroom.dita#denoise_non_local_means"/>, and <xref
                    href="../darkroom/darkroom.dita#equalizer"/>, which is based on wavelets. If
                your camera is not yet supported by <xref
                    href="../darkroom/darkroom.dita#denoise_profiled"/>, <xref
                    href="../darkroom/darkroom.dita#denoise_non_local_means"/> is probably the most
                convenient, as it allows you to treat color and luminance noise separately. </p>
        </section>
        <section id="basic_development_steps_spots">
            <title>Fixing spots</title>
            <p> Sometimes you will need to remove spots caused by sensor dirt. The <xref
                    href="../darkroom/darkroom.dita#spot_removal"/> module and the <xref
                    href="../darkroom/darkroom.dita#retouch"/> module are at hand and can also
                correct other disturbing elements like skin blemishes. If your camera has stuck
                pixels or tends to produce hot pixels at high ISO values or longer exposure times,
                have a look at the <xref href="../darkroom/darkroom.dita#hotpixels"/> module for
                automatic correction. </p>
        </section>
        <section id="basic_development_steps_geometry">
            <title>Geometrical corrections</title>
            <p> Quite frequently you want to only show part of the captured scene in your image,
                e.g. to take away some disturbing feature close to the frame. In other cases, the
                horizon in the image may need levelling, or there are perspective distortions. All
                this can be corrected with full manual control in the <xref
                    href="../darkroom/darkroom.dita#crop_and_rotate"/> module. For a fully automatic
                correction of perspective distortions you may alternatively visit the <xref
                    href="../darkroom/darkroom.dita#perspective_correction"/> module. If you need to
                correct typical camera lens flaws like cushion distortion, transversal chromatic
                aberrations or vignetting, there is a <xref
                    href="../darkroom/darkroom.dita#lens_correction"/> module. </p>
        </section>
        <section id="basic_development_steps_details">
            <title>Bringing back detail</title>
            <p> Digital raw images often contain more information than you can see at first sight.
                Especially in the shadows of an image, there are lots of hidden details. The <xref
                    href="../darkroom/darkroom.dita#shadows_and_highlights"/> module helps bring
                these details back into visible tonal values. Structural details in fully blown-out
                highlights, by nature of the digital sensor, can not be recovered. However, you can
                correct unfavorable color casts in these areas with the <xref
                    href="../darkroom/darkroom.dita#highlight_reconstruction"/> module. Additionally
                the <xref href="../darkroom/darkroom.dita#color_reconstruction"/> module is able to
                fill overexposed areas with suitable colors based on their surroundings. </p>
        </section>
        <section id="basic_development_steps_tonality">
            <title>Adjusting tonal values</title>
            <p> Almost every workflow is likely to include adjusting the image's tonal range.
                darktable offers several alternative modules to take care of that. The most basic
                one is the <xref href="../darkroom/darkroom.dita#contrast_brightness_saturation"/>
                module. In the <xref href="../darkroom/darkroom.dita#tone_curve"/> module, tonal
                values are adjusted by constructing a gradient curve. The <xref
                    href="../darkroom/darkroom.dita#levels"/> module offers a concise interface,
                with three markers in a histogram. In addition, there is a <xref
                    href="../darkroom/darkroom.dita#zone_system"/> module which allows control over
                tonal values by zones, inspired by the work of Ansel Adams. </p>
        </section>
        <section id="basic_development_steps_local_contrast">
            <title>Enhancing local contrast</title>
            <p> Local contrast enhancement can emphasize detail and clarity in your image. Carefully
                used, it can give your photograph the right pop. darktable offers several modules
                for this task. The <xref href="../darkroom/darkroom.dita#local_contrast"/> module is
                easy to handle, with just a few parameters. A much more versatile, but also more
                complex, technique is offered by the <xref
                    href="../darkroom/darkroom.dita#equalizer"/> module. Have a look at its presets,
                to get a feeling for how it works. Equalizer is darktable's "Swiss Army Knife" for
                many adjustments where spatial dimension plays a role. </p>
        </section>
        <section id="basic_development_steps_colors">
            <title>Color adjustments</title>
            <p> darktable offers many modules for adjusting colors in an image. A very
                straightforward technique is implemented in the <xref
                    href="../darkroom/darkroom.dita#color_correction"/> module. Use it to give an
                image an overall tint or to adjust overall color saturation. The <xref
                    href="../darkroom/darkroom.dita#color_zones"/> module offers a much finer
                control to adjust saturation, or lightness, and even hue, in user defined zones.
                darktable's <xref href="../darkroom/darkroom.dita#tone_curve"/> module - in addition
                to the classical adjustment of tonal values - gives you fine control over the colors
                in an image. Finally, if you intend to convert an image into black &amp; white, a
                good starting point, with an easy to use and intuitive user interface, is offered by
                the <xref href="../darkroom/darkroom.dita#monochrome"/> module. Alternatively, you
                might consider using darktable's <xref
                    href="../darkroom/darkroom.dita#channel_mixer"/>. </p>
        </section>
        <section id="basic_development_steps_sharpening">
            <title>Sharpening</title>
            <p> If you start your workflow from a raw image, you will need to have your final output
                sharpened. The <xref href="../darkroom/darkroom.dita#sharpen"/> module can do this
                with the classical USM (unsharp mask) approach, available in most image processing
                software. Another very versatile way to enhance edges in an image is offered by the
                    <xref href="../darkroom/darkroom.dita#highpass"/> module, in combination with
                darktable's rich set of blending operators. </p>
        </section>
        <section id="basic_development_steps_effects">
            <title>Artistic effects</title>
            <p> darktable comes with a rich set of artistic effect modules. To name just a few: with
                the <xref href="../darkroom/darkroom.dita#watermark"/> module you add an individual
                watermark to your image. The <xref href="../darkroom/darkroom.dita#grain"/> module
                simulates the typical noise of classical analogue footage. Use the <xref
                    href="../darkroom/darkroom.dita#color_mapping"/> module to transfer the look and
                feel of one color image onto another. darktable's <xref
                    href="../darkroom/darkroom.dita#low_light"/> module allows to simulate human
                vision to make lowlight pictures look closer to reality. The <xref
                    href="../darkroom/darkroom.dita#graduated_density"/> filter adds a neutral or
                colored gradient to your image for exposure and color correction. </p>
        </section>
    </body>
</topic>
